Move `CONTRIBUTING.md` to  `docs/`, review and update text, and add pipline-specific conventions section (#3903)
nf-core/tools: nf_core/pipeline-template/docs/CONTRIBUTING.md

  - [ ] If applicable, add a new test in the `tests` directory.
- [ ] Update `usage.md`, `output.md`, and `citation.md` as appropriate.
- [ ] [Lint](lint) the code with nf-core/tools.
- [ ] Update any diagrams or pipeline images as necessary.
      {%- if multiqc %}
- [ ] Update MultiQC config `assets/multiqc_config.yml` so relevant suffixes, file name cleanup, and module plots are in the appropriate order.
- [ ] If applicable, add a [MultiQC](https://seqera.io/multiqc/) module.
- [ ] Add a description of the output files and, if relevant, images from the MultiQC report to `docs/output.md`.
      {%- endif %}

To update the minimum required Nextflow version, see the [Nextflow version bumping](#nextflow-version-bumping) section below. For more information about pipeline contributions, see [pipeline-specific contribution guidelines](#pipeline-specific-contribution-guidelines).

#### Channel naming schemes

Use the following naming schemes for channels to make the channel flow easier to understand:

- Initial process channel: `ch_output_from_<process>`
- Intermediate and terminal channels: `ch_<previousprocess>_for_<nextprocess>`

#### Default parameter values

> Parameters should be initialised and defined with default values within the `params` scope in `nextflow.config`.

Author: ```suggestion
Parameters should be initialised and defined with default values within the `params` scope in `nextflow.config`.
They should also be documented in the pipeline JSON schema.
```

---
title: Contributing
markdownPlugin: checklist
---

# `{{ name }}`: Contributing guidelines

Hi there!
Thanks for taking an interest in improving {{ name }}.

This page describes the recommended nf-core way to contribute to both {{ name }} and nf-core pipelines in general, including:

- [General contribution guidelines](#general-contribution-guidelines): for common procedures or guides across all nf-core pipelines.

> - [Pipeline-specific contribution guidelines](#pipeline-specific-contribution-guidelines): for any procedures or guides specific to the development conventions of {{ name }}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [General contribution guidelines](#general-contribution-guidelines): common procedures or guides across all nf-core pipelines.
- [Pipeline-specific contribution guidelines](#pipeline-specific-contribution-guidelines): procedures or guides specific to the development conventions of {{ name }}.
```

{% if is_nfcore -%}

### Getting help

For further information and help, see the [{{ name }} documentation](https://nf-co.re/{{ short_name }}/usage) or ask on the nf-core [#{{ short_name }}](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/{{ short_name }}) Slack channel ([join our Slack here](https://nf-co.re/join/slack)).

{% endif -%}

{%- if codespaces %}

### GitHub Codespaces

You can contribute to {{ name }} without installing a local development environment on your machine by using [GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/codespaces).

[GitHub Codespaces](https://github.com/codespaces) is an online developer environment that runs in your browser, complete with VS Code and a terminal.
Most nf-core repositories include a devcontainer configuration, which creates a GitHub Codespaces environment specifically for Nextflow development.
The environment includes pre-installed nf-core tools, Nextflow, and a few other helpful utilities via a Docker container.

To get started, open the repository in [Codespaces](https://github.com/{{ name }}/codespaces).
{%- endif %}

### Testing

{% if test_config -%}
Once you have made your changes, run the pipeline with nf-test to test them locally.

> We recommend the `--verbose` flag to view the Nextflow console log output in addition to the output from nf-test.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information, use the `--verbose` flag to view the Nextflow console log output.
```

markdownPlugin: checklist
---

# `{{ name }}`: Contributing guidelines

Hi there!
Thanks for taking an interest in improving {{ name }}.

> This page describes the recommended nf-core way to contribute to both {{ name }} and nf-core pipelines in general.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page describes the recommended nf-core way to contribute to both {{ name }} and nf-core pipelines in general, including:
```

Reviewer: May need to refer to get started and guided steps here also.

- [General contribution guidelines](#general-contribution-guidelines): for common procedures or guides across all nf-core pipelines.
- [Pipeline-specific contribution guidelines](#pipeline-specific-contribution-guidelines): for any procedures or guides specific to the development conventions of {{ name }}.

{% if is_nfcore -%}

> [!NOTE]

> > If you need help using or modifying {{ name }}, the best place to ask is on the nf-core Slack [#{{ short_name }}](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/{{ short_name }}) channel ([join our Slack here](https://nf-co.re/join/slack)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you need help using or modifying {{ name }}, ask on the nf-core Slack [#{{ short_name }}](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/{{ short_name }}) channel ([join our Slack here](https://nf-co.re/join/slack)).
```

- [ ] [Fork](https://help.github.com/en/github/getting-started-with-github/fork-a-repo) the [{{ name }} repository](https://github.com/{{ name }}) to your GitHub account.
- [ ] Make the changes and additions on a branch of your forked repository following the [pipeline conventions](#pipeline-contribution-conventions).
- [ ] To fix a major bug, use a branch named `patch` and see the [patch release](#patch-release) section below.
- [ ] Update relevant documentation within the `docs/` folder and use nf-core/tools to update `nextflow_schema.json`.
- [ ] Run and/or update tests as appropriate (see the [Testing](#testing) section below).
- [ ] [Lint](#lint-tests) your code with nf-core/tools.
- [ ] Submit a pull request (PR) against the `dev` branch and request a review.

If you are not used to this workflow with Git, start with the [GitHub documentation](https://help.github.com/en/github/collaborating-with-issues-and-pull-requests) or their [Git resources](https://try.github.io/).

{% if is_nfcore -%}

### Getting help

> For further information and help, see the [{{ name }} documentation](https://nf-co.re/{{ short_name }}/usage) or get in touch on the nf-core Slack [#{{ short_name }}](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/{{ short_name }}) channel ([join our Slack here](https://nf-co.re/join/slack)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further information and help, see the [{{ name }} documentation](https://nf-co.re/{{ short_name }}/usage) or ask on the nf-core [#{{ short_name }}](https://nfcore.slack.com/channels/{{ short_name }}) Slack channel ([join our Slack here](https://nf-co.re/join/slack)).
```

It includes pre-installed nf-core tools, Nextflow, and a few other helpful utilities via a Docker container.

To get started, open the repository in [Codespaces](https://github.com/{{ name }}/codespaces).
{%- endif %}

### Testing

{% if test_config -%}
Once you have made your changes, test them locally by running the pipeline with nf-test.
We recommend using the `--verbose` flag to see the Nextflow console log output in addition to the output from nf-test.

```bash
nf-test test --tag test --profile +docker --verbose
```

If you have added new functionality, ensure you update the test assertions in the `.nf.test` files in the `tests/` directory.
Update the snapshots with the following command.

```bash
nf-test test --tag test --profile +docker --verbose --update-snapshots
```

{% endif -%}

When you create a pull request with changes, GitHub Actions will run automatic tests.
Pull requests are typically reviewed when these tests are passing.

{% if test_config %}Two types of tests are typically run:{% endif %}

#### Lint tests

nf-core has a [set of guidelines](https://nf-co.re/docs/contributing/guidelines) which all pipelines must follow.

> To enforce these and keep pipelines in sync, use the nf-core/tools package to run linting locally:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enforce these, run linting with nf-core/tools:
```

```bash
nf-core pipelines lint <pipeline_directory>
```

If you encounter failures or warnings, follow the linked documentation printed to screen.

> See the full list of tests in the nf-core/tools [documentation](https://nf-co.re/docs/nf-core-tools/api_reference/latest/pipeline_lint_tests/actions_awsfulltest).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about linting tests, see [nf-core/tools API documentation](https://nf-co.re/docs/nf-core-tools/api_reference/latest/pipeline_lint_tests/actions_awsfulltest).
```

{%- if test_config %}

#### Pipeline tests

Each nf-core pipeline should be set up with a minimal set of test data.
GitHub Actions then runs the pipeline on this data to ensure the pipeline runs and exits successfully.
If there are any failures then the automated tests fail.
These tests are run both with the latest available version of Nextflow and also the minimum required version that is stated in the pipeline code.
{%- endif %}

### Patch release

> [!WARNING]
> Only in the unlikely event of a release that has a bug.

- [ ] Make a new branch `patch` on your fork based on `upstream/main` or `upstream/master`.
- [ ] Fix the bug and use nf-core tools to bump the version to the next semantic version, for example, `1.2.3` → `1.2.4`.
- [ ] Open a Pull Request from `patch` directly to `main`/`master` with the changes.

### Pipeline contribution conventions

To make the `{{ name }}` code and processing logic more understandable for new contributors and to ensure quality, we semi-standardise the way the code and other contributions are written.

#### Add a new pipeline step

> If you wish to contribute a new step to the pipeline, follow the general nf-core coding procedure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To contribute a new step to the pipeline, follow the general nf-core coding procedure:
```

- [ ] Add new or updated parameters and relevant help text to `nextflow_schema.json` with [nf-core/tools](#default-parameter-values).
- [ ] Add validation for relevant parameters to the pipeline utilisation section of `utils_nfcore_{{ shortname }}\_pipeline/main.nf` subworkflow.
- [ ] Perform local tests to validate that the new code works as expected.
  - [ ] If applicable, add a new test in the `tests` directory.
- [ ] Update `usage.md`, `output.md`, and `citation.md` as appropriate.
- [ ] [Lint](lint) the code with nf-core/tools.
- [ ] Update any diagrams or pipeline images as necessary.
      {%- if multiqc %}
- [ ] Update MultiQC config `assets/multiqc_config.yml` so relevant suffixes, file name cleanup, and module plots are in the appropriate order.
- [ ] If applicable, add a [MultiQC](https://seqera.io/multiqc/) module.
- [ ] Add a description of the output files and, if relevant, images from the MultiQC report to `docs/output.md`.
      {%- endif %}

If you need to update the minimum required Nextflow version, please see the [Nextflow version bumping](#nextflow-version-bumping) section below.

#### Channel naming schemes

> Use the following naming schemes for channels to make the channel flow easier to understand.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the following naming schemes for channels to make the channel flow easier to understand:
```
